{\rtf1\ansi 
\deff4\deflang1033
{\fonttbl{\f1\froman\fcharset2\fprq2 Symbol;}
{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}
{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial;}
{\f11\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 Courier New;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}
{\stylesheet
{\widctlpar \f4\fs24 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\i\f5 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s3\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \f5 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}
{\s15\widctlpar\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 \tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640 \f4\fs24 
\sbasedon0\snext15 header;}
{\s16\fi-360\li360\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvl11\pnf1\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnhang{\pntxtb \'b7}}\f4\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext16 List Bullet;}
{\s17\widctlpar \f11\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext17 Code;}
{\s18\widctlpar\box\brdrsh\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 \f4\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext18 Figure;}
{\s19\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640 \f4\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext19 footer;}
{\*\cs20 \additive\sbasedon10 page number;}}
{\info{\title Linkers and loader chapter}
{\author John R. Levine}
{\operator John R. Levine}
{\*\company I.E.C.C.}{\vern57431}}
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\formshade \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere 

{\header \pard\plain \s15\widctlpar\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw15\brsp20 \tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640 \f4\fs24
{\i References\tab \tab }{\field{\*\fldinst {\cs20  PAGE }}
{\fldrslt {\cs20\lang1024 1}}}}
\pard\plain \s1\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\f5\fs28\kerning28 Chapter XX: References
\par\pard\plain
{\i $Revision: 2.1 $} \line{\i $Date: 1999/06/04 20:30:28 $} {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
IBM, MVS/ESA Linkage Editor and Loader User's Guide, Order number SC26-4510, 1991.  Also available as http://www.ibm.com/ {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
AT&T, System V Application Binary Interface, UNIX Press/Prentice Hall, ISBN 0-13-877598-2, 1990. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
AT&T, System V ABI Motorola 68000 Processor Family Supplement, UNIX Press/Prentice Hall, ISBN 0-13-877663-6, 1990. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
AT&T, System V ABI Intel386 Architecture Processor Family Supplement, Intel, Order number 465681, 1990. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Tool Interface Standard (TIS) Portable Formats Specification Version 1.1, Intel order number 241597, 1993. Also at {\f11 http://developer.intel.com/vtune/tis.htm}. {\i Describes ELF, DWARF, and OMF for x86.} {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Tool Interface Standard (TIS) Formats Specification for Windows Version 1.0, Intel order number 241597, 1993. {\i Describes PE format and debug symbols, } lthough Microsoft has changed them since this came out." {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Randy Kath, The Portable Executable File Format from Top to Bottom, {\f11 http://premium.microsoft.com/msdn/library/techart/msdn_pefile.htm}, 1993. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Matt Pietrek, Peering Inside the PE: A Tour of the Win32 Portable Executable File Format, {\f11 http://premium.microsoft.com/msdn/library/techart/msdn_peeringpe.htm}, 1994. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Microsoft Portable Executable  and Common Object File Format  Specification,  Revision 5.0, {\f11 http://premium.microsoft.com/msdn/library/specs/pecoff/microsoftportableexecutableandcommonobjectfileformatspecification.htm}, October 1997 {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Daniel Barlow, The Linux GCC HOWTO, {\f11 http://www.linux-howto.com/LDP/HOWTO/GCC-HOWTO.html}, 1996. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Matt Pietrek, Windows 95 System Programming Secrets, IDG Books, ISBN  1-56884-318-6, 1995. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Intel, 8086 Relocatable Object Module Formats, Order number 121748, 1981. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Ellis and Stroustrup, The Annotated C++ Reference Manual, Addison-Wesley, ISBN 0-201-51459-1, 1990. {\i Includes the C++ name mangling algorithm.} {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
David Gries, Compiler Construction for Digital Computers, Wiley, ISBN 0-471-32776-X, 1971. {\i Contains one of the best available description of IBM card image object format.} {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Mary Fernandez, Simple and effective link-time optimization of Modula-3 programs, PLDI 95 Proceedings (ACM SIGPLAN Notices V30, N6, June 1996), pp. 102-115. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
A. Srivastava and D. W. Wall, A practical system for intermodule code optimization at link-time, Journal of Programming Langugages, March 1993, pp. 1-18. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Michael Franz and Thomas Kistler, Slim Binaries, Department of Information and Computer Science, University of California at Irvine, Tech report 96-24, 1996. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Robert Cohn, David Goodwin, P. Geoffrey Lowney, and Norman Rubin Spike: An Optimizer for Alpha/NT Executables, In USENIX Windows NT Workshop, August 11-13, 1997. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
A. Srivastava and D. Wall.  ``Link-Time Optimization of Address Calculation on a 64-bit Architecture,'' Programming Language Design and Implementation, Orlando, FL, June 1994. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Ted Romer, Geoff Voelker, Dennis Lee, Alec Wolman, Wayne Wong, Hank Levy, and Brian Bershad, Instrumentation and Optimization of Win32/Intel Executables Using Etch, In USENIX Windows NT Workshop, August 11-13, 1997. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Christopher Fraser and David Hanson A Machine-Independent Linker Software Practice and Experience, Vol 12, pp. 351-366, 1982. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Tim Lindholm and Frank Yellin , The Java[tm] Virtual Machine Specification, Second Edition, Addison-Wesley, 1999, ISBN,0-201-43294-3. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Bill Venners, Inside the Java Virtual Machine, second edition. McGraw-Hill, 1999. ISBN 0-07-135093-4. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Apple Computer, Inside Macintosh: MacOS Runtime Architectures, http://developer.apple.com/techpubs/mac/runtimehtml/RTArch-2.html. {\fs24 
\par }
 \pard\plain \s2\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar \b\i\f5 Perl books
\par \pard\plain
Larry Wall, Tom Christiansen, and Randal Schwartz, Programming Perl, Second Edition, O'Reilly, 1996, ISBN 1-56592-149-6. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Randal Schwartz, Learning Perl, O'Reilly, 1993, ISBN 1-56592-042-2. {\fs24 
\par }
\par\pard\plain
Paul Hoffman, Perl for Dummies, IDG Books, 1998, ISBN 0-7645-0460-6. }
